============
User Guide
============

This guide provides an overview for working with the :mod:`OptiDamTool` package.


Verify Installation
---------------------

To verify the installation, import the package and module and instantiate the classes using the following code.
If no errors are raised, the installation is successful.


.. code-block:: python

    import OptiDamTool
    watemsedem = OptiDamTool.WatemSedem()
    network = OptiDamTool.Network()

    
    
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) to Stream 
---------------------------------------------

To generates the input files required to run the WaTEM/SEDEM model with the
`river routing = 1 <https://watem-sedem.github.io/watem-sedem/model_extensions.html#riverrouting>`_ extension, use the following code.
Refer to the :meth:`OptiDamTool.WatemSedem.dem_to_stream` method for more details on the output.
A sample DEM raster file available in the `data <https://github.com/debpal/OptiDamTool/tree/main/tests/data>`_ directory for testing purposes.

.. code-block:: python

    watemsedem.dem_to_stream(
        dem_file=r"C:\users\username\data\dem.tif",
        flwacc_percent=1,
        folder_path=r"C:\users\username\output_folder",
    )
    
    
Extend Raster Region 
--------------------------

Because WaTEM/SEDEM does not support NoData cells, rasters must be extended beyond the original model region to include a buffer area.
To do this, a raster covering the model region, typically the DEM raster, is used to create an extended region raster that includes the desired buffer zone.
This extended region raster is then used to extend the stream raster generated by the :meth:`OptiDamTool.WatemSedem.dem_to_stream` method,
filling the additional areas with valid values to ensure the entire output raster contains no NoData cells. Use the following code to perform these steps:

.. code-block:: python
    
    # extended region raster with DEM boundary polygons
    watemsedem.extend_model_region(
        region_file=r"C:\users\username\data\dem.tif",
        buffer_distance=1500,
        resolution=30,
        folder_path=r"C:\users\username\output_folder"
    )
    
    # stream extension with extended region raster
    watemsedem.extend_raster_nodata_free(
        input_file=r"C:\users\username\output_folder\stream_lines.tif",
        fill_value=0,
        region_file=r"C:\users\username\output_folder\region_buffer.tif",
        output_file=r"C:\users\username\output_folder\stream_buffer.tif"
    )    

    
Adjacent Connectivity Between Dams
-----------------------------------------

To determine the adjacent upstream and downstream connectivity between dams based on a stream network, a stream shapefile is required.
This shapefile must contain a column representing a unique identifier for each stream segment.

Only one dam can be deployed per stream segment, and the dam is identified by the corresponding stream segment’s unique identifier.
The specified stream segment identifiers are used to designate dam deployment locations.

A sample stream shapefile is available in the  `data <https://github.com/debpal/OptiDamTool/tree/main/tests/data>`_ directory.
The following code generates dictionaries representing the adjacent upstream and downstream connectivity of dams based on the stream network.
In these dictionaries, a value of -1 indicates no downstream connectivity, while an empty list indicates no upstream connectivity.


.. code-block:: python
    
    # adjacent downstream connectivity
    network.connectivity_adjacent_downstream(
        stream_file=r"C:\users\username\data\stream.shp",
        stream_col='ws_id',
        dam_list=[21, 22, 5, 31, 17, 24, 27, 2, 13, 1]
    )
    
    # adjacent upstream connectivity
    network.connectivity_adjacent_downstream(
        stream_file=r"C:\users\username\data\stream.shp",
        stream_col='ws_id',
        dam_list=[21, 22, 5, 31, 17, 24, 27, 2, 13, 1]
    )
    
    
Effective Drainage Area of Dams
-----------------------------------------

When working with a dam system within a stream network, the effective upstream drainage areas
for each dam are dynamically influenced by their specific locations. The following code demonstrates
how to calculate these areas and generate both a dictionary of values and a polygon shapefile representing the upstream drainage areas.


.. code-block:: python
    
    # dictionary of dams' effective upstream drainage area
    network.network.effective_upstream_drainage_area(
        stream_file=r"C:\users\username\data\stream.shp",
        stream_col='ws_id',
        info_file=r"C:\users\username\data\stream_information.txt"
        dam_list=[21, 22, 5, 31, 17, 24, 27, 2, 13, 1]
    )    
    
    # GeoDataFrame of dams' effective upstream drainage polygons
    watemsedem.dam_effective_drainage_area(
        flwdir_file=r"C:\users\username\flwdir.shp",
        location_file=r"C:\users\username\subbasin_drainage_points.shp",
        location_col='ws_id',
        dam_list=[21, 22, 5, 31, 17, 24, 27, 2, 13, 1],
        folder_path=r"C:\users\username\output_folder"
    )    
    
 